Similarity score: 0.7586185387176141The Straussian Moment Peter Thiel President, Clarium Capital Management For Idipt into the future, far as human eye could see, Saw the Vision of the world, and all the wonder that would be; Saw the heavens fil with commerce, argosies of magic sails, Pilots of the purple twilight dropping down with costly bales; Heard the heavens fill with shouting, and there rain‘ a ghastly dew From the nations’ airy navies grappling in the central blue; Far along the world-wide whisper of the south-wind rushing warm, With the standards of the peoples plunging thro’ the thunder-storm; Til the war-drum throbb‘d no longer, and the battle-flags were furld In the Parliament of man, the Federation of the world. There the common sense of most shall hold afretful realm in awe, And the kindly earth shall slumber, lapt in universal law. —Alfred, Lord Tennyson, “Locksley Hall” he twenty-first century started with a bang on September 11, 2001. In those shocking hours, the entire political and military framework of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, and indeed of the mod- ern age, with its emphasis on deterrent armies, rational nation-states, public debates, and international diplomacy, was called into question, For how could mere talking or even great force deter a handful of crazy, determined, and sui- cidal persons who seemingly operated outside of al the norms of the liberal 189 190 Peter Thiel West? And what needed now to be done, given that technology had advanced to a point where a tiny number of people could inflict unprecedented levels ofdamage and death? The awareness of the West’s vulnerability called for a new compromise, and this new compromise inexorably demanded more security at the expense of less freedom. On the narrow level of public policy, there needed to be more x-ray machines at airports; more security guards on airplanes; more identification cards and invasions of privacy; and fewer rights for some of the accused. Overnight, the fundamentalist civil rights mania of the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU), which 

Similarity score: 0.740700413049363f weeping, but left us example of laughter.!°° *Ok But the world has not yet come to an end, and there is no easy telling how long the twilight of the modern age will endure. What then must be done, by the Christian statesman or stateswoman aspiring to be a wise steward for our time? The negative answers are straightforward. There can be no return to the archaic world or even to the robust conception of the political envisioned by Carl Schmitt. There can be no real accommodation with the Enlightenment, since so many of its easy bromides have become deadly falsehoods in our time. But also there cannot be a decision to avoid al decisions and to retreat into studying the Bible in anticipation of the Second Coming, for then one wil have ceased to be a statesman or stateswoman. The Christian statesman or stateswoman must diverge from the teachings of Strauss in one decisive respect. Unlike Strauss, the Christian statesman or stateswoman knows that the modern age will not be permanent, and ulti- mately will give way to something very different. One must never forget that one day al will be revealed, that al injustices will be exposed, and that those who perpetrated them will be held to account. And so, in determining the correct mixture of violence and peace, the Christian statesman or stateswoman would be wise, in every close case, to side with peace. There is no formula to answer the critical question of what SIA PGHAIT GHOANCLS   ‘The Straussian Moment 215 constitutes a “close case”; that must be decided in every specific instance. It may wel be that the cumulative decisions made in al those close instances wil determine the destiny of the postmodern world. For that world could dif- fer from the modern world in a way that is much worse or much better—the limitless violence of runaway mimesis or the peace of the kingdom of God. NOTES 1. Leo Strauss, Thoughts on Machiavelli (Glencoe, IL: Free Press, 1958), 9-10. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. l. 12. 13. Pierre Manent, The City of Man, trans. Mark A. LePain (Princeton, NJ

Similarity score: 0.7405707538891354ogether into some functioning whole. Where agreement over questions of virtue, the good life, and the true religion was unraveling, the immediate attempt involved forging such an agreement through force. This force escalated in the periods of the Reformation and Counter Reformation, and culminated in the parox- ysm of the Thirty Years’ War, which remains perhaps the most deadly period in the history of Europe. By some estimates, in Germany, the locus of the conflict, well over half the population was eradicated. However, at the end of this process, agreement had become more elusive than ever, the differences greater than ever. The violence had failed to create anew unity. This failure was formalized in the Peace of Westphalia, so that 1648 can be fixed as the single year that dates the birth of the modern era. Questions of virtue and the true religion henceforth would be decided by each sovereign. The sovereigns would agree to disagree. Inexorably, ques- tions of virtue and religion became private questions; polite and respectable individuals learned not to talk about them too much, because they could lead tonothing but unproductive conflicts. For the modern world, questions about the nature of humanity would be viewed on par with the struggle among the Lilliputians about the correct way to cut open an egg. Hobbes, the first truly modern philosopher, boasted of how he deserted and ran away from fighting inareligious war, a cowardly life had become preferable to a heroic but meaningless death.> Dulce et decorum est pro patria mori had been an important part of the old tradition, henceforth, it would be seen as nothing more than an old lie. And so, the Enlightenment undertook a major strategic retreat. If the only way to stop people from killing one another about the right way to open an egg involved a world where nobody thought about it too much, then the   194 Peter Thiel intellectual cost of ceasing such thought seemed a small price to pay. The question ofhuman nature was abandoned because itistoo perilous aques

Similarity score: 0.7370261174467075: Princeton University Press, 1998), 27. Manent, The City, 27. Manent, The City, 35. Leo Strauss, Natural Right and History (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1953), 197. John Locke, Atheism, in John Locke: Political Essays, ed. Mark Goldie, 2nd ed. (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1999), 245-46. John Locke, First Treatise of Government, in Two Treatises of Government, ed. Peter Laslett, 2nd ed. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003), 214. Locke, Second Treatise of Government, in Two Treatises of Government, 321. Locke, First Treatise, 216. Locke, Second Treatise, 294 and 352. Locke, Second Treatise, 297. Locke, Second Treatise, 300. Locke, Second Treatise, 362. 14. John Locke, The Reasonableness of Christianity, with A Discourse of Miracles, and part ofA Third Letter Concerning Toleration, ed. abridged, and with an introduction by I. T. Ramsey (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2002), 38. 15. Egon Mayer, Barry A. Kosmin, and Ariela Keysar, The City University of New York American Religious Identification Survey, http://www.gc.cuny.edu/faculty/research_briefs/aris/key_findings. him (noting that 76.5 percent of Americans identify themselves as “Christian”). 16. Manent, The City, 113 (citation and quotation omitted). 17. John Locke, Essay Concerning Human Understanding, ed. Alexander Campbell Fraser (Cam- bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1959), 313-21. 18. Manent, The City, 123-24. 19. Manent, The City, 169-71. 20. Locke, Essay, 391-95. 

Similarity score: 0.7357935841876905tion to debate. Joun Locke: THE AMERICAN COMPROMISE The new science of economics and the practice of capitalism filled the vacuum created by the abandonment of the older tradition. That new science found its most important proponent in John Locke and its greatest practical success in the United States, anation whose conception owed so much to Locke that one exaggerates only slightly to describe him as its definitive founder. We must return to the eighteenth century to appreciate the tremendous change Locke wrought. Revolutionary America was haunted by the fear of religious war and the fanatical imposition of virtue on the entire state. The Declaration of Independence’s evocation of “the right to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness” had a counterpoint in the older tradition, in which the first two had not existed and the pursuit of happiness would have seemed infe- rior to (and certainly much more subjective than) the virtuous life. When one fast-forwards to the America of the 1990s, the larger context of the Founding had been forgotten: America had proved so successful in shaping the modern world that most Americans could no longer recognize the originality and strangeness ofitsfounding conception. Locke’s personal example is instructive of the subtle path toward the liberalism of the American Revolution. Locke’s argument proceeds in an understated manner; he does not wish to inflame passions by taking sides in the contentious debates of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. But since it would be offensive to suggest that the things that matter most to people are silly or irrelevant, he also must avoid inflaming passions by openly denigrating al those who do take sides. In no place is there a greater need for sensitivity than on the question of religion. Religious passions had led to religious wars, but a passionate repudiation of religion (and of Christianity in particular) did not promise peace. Locke did not need the examples of the French or Russian Revolutions to know this. And so the philosopher 

